
# What's Here
This document describes the [browser:trunk/hlsvdpro files that comprise this port].

## Straightforward Ports
The following files have a 1:1 correlation with Fortran files of the same
name: `aprodw.py`, `hlsvdpro.py`, `lanczopw.py`, `zgemmina.py` (from 
`zgemm_ovwr.f`), `zget0w.py`, `zlanbprow.py`, `zlansvdw.py`, `zreorth.py`, 
and `zsafescal.py`.

The files `dbdsqr.py` (a [HlsvdproPortDbdsqr wrapper for the binary function]) and 
`dlartg.py` are ports of files from BLAS/LAPACK.

## New Required Files
The file `util.py` contains some code used by the files above.

## Unused Files
The files `lanczopw_using_fortran.py` and `zlansvdw_using_fortran.py` are 
wrappers for the Fortran versions of `lanczopw()` and `zlansvdw()` 
respectively. I used them in the process of porting while I still relied on 
Fortran versions of these functions. 

They probably don't work anymore (the function interfaces have
changed) but it wouldn't take too much to get them working again. And if
nothing else, they're a useful reference on how to call Fortran from Python.

## Data Files
The file `first_random.txt` contains the 
[HlsvdproPortRandomness random numbers] generated by 
the first call to the Fortran function `zlarnv()` in `zget0w.f`. I used these
numbers when trying to get my Python code to exactly match the output of the
Fortran. See [browser:trunk/hlsvdpro/zget0w.py zget0w.py].

## Testing Files
The files `test.py` and `otest.py` are siblings. The former runs the Python
version of the code, the latter runs the Fortran version (a.k.a. the 
original version, hence the name `otest`). They can be edited to use 
a specific default input file, to run the profiler, and to show a graph 
that compares HLSVD's version of the signal to the real thing.


The file `stats.py` prints statistics from the profile data generated by 
`test.py`. 

## Original (Fortran) Files
The "original" Fortran files are in the `original` directory. This started as 
a copy of the Vespa version of Vespa's `hlsvd` directory. As I worked I 
modified the Fortran to add many, many print statements and a few wrappers
to make the code callable from Python. See Vespa for documentation on how
to use the Makefiles. 

